---
aliases:
- 诺瓦亚海
tags:
- 地理
- 诺瓦亚
- 拉普里奥
- 图斯克
- 海洋
---

# Novaya Sea

The **Novaya Sea** is a vast inland sea in the eastern continent of [Laaerad](docs/zh/地理与区域/拉埃拉德.md), playing a pivotal role in the history, geography, economy, and culture of the [Trusk Empire](../../国家与王朝/图斯克帝国/index.md).

## Geographical Features

The Novaya Sea is located in the eastern part of the [Trusk Empire's](../../国家与王朝/图斯克帝国/index.md) territory. Its coastline boasts the continent's most fertile arable land, forming extensive plains highly suitable for agriculture. It connects to the North Sea and the South Sea via the [Heimet Strait](../../../en/概念/黑蔑特.md#黑蔑特<ruby>海峡<rt>miela</rt></ruby>) and the [Laprio Strait](../拉普里奥/index.md), controlling the most crucial transportation hub on the continent.

*   **Climate**: The core region of the **Novaya Sea** primarily experiences a climate where rainfall and heat occur in different seasons. However, the northern part is also influenced by North Sea ocean currents, resulting in some areas with a temperate maritime climate.
*   **Resources**: The **Novaya Sea** is rich in fishery resources, with a great variety and abundance of fish, along with various other marine products.

## Strategic and Economic Importance

The geographical location of the **Novaya Sea** makes it the cornerstone of the Trusk Empire's commercial and military hegemony:

*   **Transportation Hub**: The [Heimet Strait](黑蔑特/index.md), as the only strait in the **Novaya Sea** with a deep-water port unaffected by ocean currents and never freezing, serves as a crucial hub for the Trusk Empire's advance into and retreat from the **Novaya Sea**.
*   **Commercial Lifeline**: Since the [First Heimet Dynasty](黑蔑特王朝.md#黑蔑特第一王朝), the shipping and trade system of the Novaya Sea has been the primary economic source for the various Trusk dynasties. Favorable climatic conditions, the advanced shipbuilding skills of artisans, and the "magic"-enhanced sealed longships provided many conveniences for the commercial activities of the [index](../../国家与王朝/图斯克帝国/index.md). Goods from across the empire, including sable furs from the northern frontier.
*   **Agricultural Foundation**: The fertile coastal farmland provides the empire with a stable food supply, serving as a crucial guarantee for its population and economic development.

## Cultural Influence

The **Novaya Sea** has had a profound impact on Trusk culture:

*   **Spiritual Symbol**: The flourishing commercial activities fostered a spirit of freedom and exploration among the Trusk people.
*   **Religious Association**: There are many folk festivals related to navigation, closely associated with the Sea God faith. As the core indigenous religion of Trusk, the Sea God faith's belief system is intimately connected to the ocean, viewing the sea as a symbol of the world's primordial chaos, fate, and the natural cycle.