---
tags:
- 咕洛
- '#传说'
- 神话
---

# Glömezher Legends

A comparison between the Glömezher and Chinese versions.

For specific vocabulary and grammar, refer to the document [Glömezher](../../语言/图斯克/咕洛语.md).

## 1 Piyomat Sajera - The Beginning of the World

- Lashurchimat, nayuko omlaa Valasali. Samen sora hafokimuj Valamat, Johuzaca greyadij omsamenmat.
	- Long ago, there was only the boundless ocean. Many mountains floated on the sea, and the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby> dwelled upon these mountains.

- Yit Samen, sap saf sora Samenci, namokim Lakmesamen, Samen laa Komoxa. Se Lakme-Samen jihahij haddur ag jur. Lakme gyem Komoe laa nuyoscho.
    - There was one mountain taller than all others, its name was <ruby>Lakme<rt>Giant</rt>Samen<rt>Mountain</rt></ruby> -- the Mountain of Giants. This Mountain of Giants separated night and day. Giants are people of immense stature.

- Lakme gyem miv Jnyorcucho Lakme. Zhose Jnyorcu omolamat, soce Nuyolomat. Nuyolomat Jnyor poeta Virapu ag Jyomapu Sorato Sajeramat.
    - <ruby>Lakme<rt>Giants</rt></ruby> are three-eyed giants. Their two eyes are on their heads, the third eye is on their chests. The chest eye can hear and see everything in the world.

- Lakmesamenra sapyon sap Samen, namokim Jnyor Saptim. Se gyemij yit Pyolashurmat Lakmece ddodtrohune Sapot, yit Bugna Taayumat Eradru, yit Lesh Seelömit.
    - The highest peak of <ruby>Lakme<rt>Giant</rt>Samen<rt>Mountain</rt></ruby> is called <ruby>Jnior<rt>Eye</rt>Sautim<rt>Peak</rt></ruby>. It was once a tall tower built by ancient giants, a pillar connecting the sky and the earth, a path leading to the Star Ring.

## 2 Lakmera abmorap - The Fall of the Giants

- Lakmeci yit johuzahune Hurmat, ddodmorij. Mibi keggamij seeloera Jozulohot, ma Jozulohot ddodmorij Lakmeci. Lakmeci magiyeyazyahij Johuzacahu. Johuzaca baguhuj sorato Lakmeci.
	- The giants met their doom during a certain "divine" era. They attempted to harness the power of the Star Ring, but were instead consumed by its power. They defiled the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby>, and the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby> brought down calamity to destroy them.

- Sa Johuza, yit Jnyorcho, yit Zhece, yit Arisce maje Poyece, ma zho Okruscho, ag yit Konoydcho.
	- That <ruby>Johuza<rt>Deity</rt></ruby> had only one eye, one mouth, one arm, no legs, but had two pairs of wings and a <ruby>Konoyd<rt>Phallus</rt></ruby>.

- Pyoyat magiyeyazyahij Johuzacahu, namokim Latroda.
	- The first to defile the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby> was called <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>.

- Latroda Taakrohu Lakmecira. Mibb gyemij saypon laa, saypon edom, sorati Lakmecimat.  Meb Trobbuhot poeta veba ilehoet Johuzaxo.
	- <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> was the <ruby>Taakro<rt>King</rt></ruby> of the giants. He was the tallest and strongest among all giants. His power was enough to rival the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby>.

- Geya Taakroxo namokim Ramro, Se Johuzaxo Nomeya .
	- The giant king's wife was named <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> -- the daughter of the god.

- Lasvira, pokro Latrodaxo, daamahuj Latrodamat: "Johuza dejan ulohuz soxa geyara, ag mib detmagiyebit geyahi soxa."  Makag Latroda maknotyosij Mibi.  "Maze Johuza, Bam Ramroxo,  poeta dedmagiye Ramro?"
	- <ruby>Lasvira<rt>Long Listener</rt> </ruby>, <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>'s brother, said to <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>: "The <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby> covets your wife's beauty and wishes to defile your wife." But <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> did not believe it. "The god is <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby>'s father, how could he harm <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby>?"

- Se Jurmat, Ramro moswahuj Mörikehi dorat. No zho Jurce, makag Ramro maklebij.
	- On this day, <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> went out riding, and even after two nights had passed, she had not returned.

- Latroda doddnyohuj dosuyap Johuzahu.
	- <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> began to suspect the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby>.

- Makag, magur Ju dedsap mivhurcucho, Ramro lebij.  Mib daamahuj Latrodamit: "Hira moswahuj Mörikehi dorat, hira syomij  kuilece tohtad ag puwalcho wserad.  Sakarmat,  sora Yab ag Gganva gyemij. Hira dejan sakar, hira madyebij lebaphi."
	- However, when the sun rose for the third time, <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> returned. She said to <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>: "I rode to a distant place, I saw the City of Gold and the Garden of Flowers. There was abundant food and fine wine, I became intoxicated and lingered, almost forgetting to return home."

- Sesa jurmat, Ramro jepamij sijante akeermat, makag Latroda syomij mibi.
	- On another day, <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> slipped out secretly, but <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> saw her.

- Latroda mak-tyebnaat notyosophu, makag Lasvirara daamaap Jomat Latrodaxo.
	- <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> was unwilling to believe, but the words of <ruby>Lasvira<rt>Long Listener</rt> </ruby> lingered in his heart.

- Mib nyojapuj Ramrocho, jepamyehij Jnyorsaptummat. Sakarmat, mib syomij Ramrohi pyokimuj wiseradmat Johuzaxo. Latroda jolukimuj sora. Mib dagoruj Kuile Jnyorsaptumxo, a bugomij Wiserad Jnyorsaptumxo. Mib bordaskim wiseradmat, makag Mib makjyomuj Remro.  Latroda, Jolukcho, baguhuj johuzahu.
	- He then <ruby>nyojapuj<rt>followed</rt></ruby> <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> and arrived at the foot of <ruby>Jnior<rt>Eye</rt>Sautim<rt>Peak</rt></ruby>. There, he discovered <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> entering the dwelling of the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby>. <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> was filled with rage. He shattered the crystal of <ruby>Jnior<rt>Eye</rt>Sautim<rt>Peak</rt></ruby> and smashed open the gate of <ruby>Jnior<rt>Eye</rt>Sautim<rt>Peak</rt></ruby>. He charged into the palace but did not see <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby>. In his fury, he exerted all his strength and killed the <ruby>Johuzai<rt>Johuza</rt></ruby>.

- Johuza Pyowudmat daamahuj Magiye Latrodamat: "Sot gyembit Makjyomune, Makvirane, Maktyejane. Sot abmor Jnyorsaptummat, Lashurcimat makvoyaru akeerce." Samat, Latroda gyemij Makjyomune, Makvirane, Maktyejane. Mib abmor Jnyorsaptummat, Lashurchu makvoyaru akeerce.
	- The <ruby>Johuza<rt>Deity</rt></ruby>, before dying, cursed <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>: "You will be unable to speak, unable to hear, unable to see, unable to perceive. You will be trapped at the Eye Peak, forever unable to leave." Thus, <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> could no longer speak, hear, see, or perceive. He was trapped beneath the Eye Peak, forever unable to leave.

- Lasvira, nyo Lakmera Taakro gyemij. Detgyemij Ramro meb Geya. Ma, Ramro jova Latroda laachu, Mib Johuzara ilehötce, voyaruhuj Jnyorsaptummat, Latrodamit Snihetij.
	- <ruby>Lasvira<rt>Long Listener</rt> </ruby> became the new giant king. He forced <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> to become his wife. However, <ruby>Ramro<rt>Kindhearted</rt></ruby> deeply loved <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>. Carrying the spirit of the god, she went to the Eye Peak to watch over <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>.

- Magur Latroda Jnyorsaptumru voyaruhuj, sa Saptim abmoruj. Badur ag dög ayit fuyara Saujemat. Sörati Lakmeci uuduj. Sa Saje Wiishaz Magiyehi. Latrodaru Nuyos abgyemij nyo Samenhi. Meb Luudn fuyarahuj glöhi, ag valaahu. Meb Jnyorcu abmoruj, abgyemij Lögce Samenhi.
	- When <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby> left <ruby>Jnior<rt>Eye</rt>Sautim<rt>Peak</rt></ruby>, the <ruby>Jnior<rt>Eye</rt>Sautim<rt>Peak</rt></ruby> collapsed. Endless cold and scorching heat swept across the world. All the giants perished, and the world became chaos. <ruby>Latroda<rt>The Mighty One</rt></ruby>'s body transformed into new mountains. His blood flowed to become rivers and oceans. His eyes fell and became burning volcanoes.