---
tags:
  - Trusk
  - concept
  - english
aliases:
  - Trusk Kingdom
  - Old Trusk
  - Trusk Basin
---
# Trusk

**Trusk**, a concept that not only refers to the historical Trusk Empire but also broadly encompasses the language, culture, and ethnic groups of the region. Compared to other areas of the Empire (such as **Laporio**), Trusk places a greater emphasis on its centralized traditions, military system, and cultural unity.

## Etymology

"Trusk" originates from the Straits Trusk language word "_trusk_", which in turn comes from the older Proto-language "_tʰro_", meaning "to make." This name likely reflects the early Trusk people's social identity and their advantage in shipbuilding and forging technology.

## Old Trusk

**Old Trusk** is also a relatively complex concept. In a narrow sense, **Old Trusk** refers to the Old Trusk city-states before the **Kuileot** Dynasty. In a broader sense, **Old Trusk** can also refer to the historical Old Trusk region, which is the collective name for the cities and tribes in the Trusk Basin.

## Trusk Basin

The Trusk Basin, also known as the Old Trusk region, is the birthplace of the Trusk Empire and the location of the Old Trusk city-states.

## Trusk Kingdom

The Trusk Kingdom was the precursor to the Trusk Empire and an early polity of the empire, serving as its core territory. This polity originally ruled the central part of the old continent of Laerad, but it later declined and perished due to historical changes. Its eastern and western regions were inherited by the Hemet Kingdom and the Tiesuku Kingdom, respectively, forming two independent monarchical systems. Each of these successor states adopted the political system, legal norms, and some cultural traditions of the original polity, but they gradually developed differences in specific governance and the symbolism of their monarchies.

## Related Entries

| Category  | Entry |
| --------- | ----- |
| Geography |       |
| People    |       |

### Sub-entries

| Entry            | Type      | Summary                                                                                                                                                               |
| ---------------- | --------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Trusk Empire     | State     | A powerful empire that once ruled the core regions of the continent of Laerad, with a highly centralized political and military system.                               |
