---
tags:
  - Laporio
  - concept
  - strait
  - region
  - nation
  - kingdom
---
# **Laporio**

**Laporio** is a historical and cultural concept on the old continent of Laerad, encompassing multiple layers such as nation, language, ethnicity, and geography. The concept originated from the regional divisions during the Trusk Empire era.

---

## **The Laporio Region**

The Laporio region is a vast subtropical area south of Trusk, bordered by Krusofa and Geqziwa. The Laporio region is rich in resources. In the late period of the First Dynasty of Heimet, the introduction of farming techniques and more advanced agricultural machinery led to a rapid increase in the region's grain output. Today, it has the highest average grain yield among all Trusk territories.

## **The Kingdom of Laporio**

During the ancient Trusk period, due to its climate and geography, various tribes in Laporio had poor transportation links, did not form a stable political power, and left no definitive records.

The concept of the Kingdom of Laporio originated from the Laporio Strait. During Trusk's conquest of Bagunalo, a great war broke out between two city-states near the Laporio Strait. The victor gained control of the strait and established a maritime regime based on the Novaya Sea, ruling the southern part of what is now the Trusk Empire and even establishing strongholds in the territory of Drodsias. This regime was later destroyed during the invasion of Kongdounian.

The Trusk Empire briefly ruled the Laporio region during the Basib Dynasty after the collapse of the Novaja Dynasty, but soon lost control of the area to an attack by the Glömer people. During the Moswarik Dynasty, the son of Turhaike conquered the Laporio region but did not establish a formal administrative system, instead adopting a loose tributary rule.

During the reign of the third emperor of the Second Dynasty of Heimet, the empire regained control of Ruilian and Klisa, establishing the Laporio Prefecture and requiring the Laporians to pay tribute in the form of a treaty. This is considered the prototype of today's Kingdom of Laporio.

Subsequently, in the chaotic times brought by a plague, Decoheim I successively captured Klisa, Gernada, and Bassa, and besieged the Laporio territories, ultimately gaining control of the south. During the period of fragmentation from the northern regime, Decheim dedicated his efforts to promoting ethnic integration and the spread of the Trusk language in Laporio to strengthen his rule in the south. He eventually succeeded in a counter-attack on Heimet, unified Trusk, established the Tyesuku Dynasty, and founded the Kingdom of Laporio.

## **The Laporio Strait**

At the southern end of the Novaya Sea, mirroring Heimet, is the birthplace of the Laporio people: the Laporio Strait. The Laporio Strait's natural conditions as a port are not as good as Heimet's, but the climate of the Laporio region is better than Heimet's, and the commodity output near the strait actually exceeds that of Heimet.

## **The Laporio People**

The predominant ethnic group residing in the Laporio region. They mainly speak a Trusk language dialect that is a blend of ancient Laporio languages, also known as the Laporio dialect.