---
tags:
- Tyesuku
- Trusk
- concept
- surname
- city
- region
- family
---
# **Tyesuku**

**Tyesuku** is a name of an important family from the early imperial period of Laaerad, and also the name of the region they ruled. The family originated from a small city at the end of the Krusofa River in the southern Trusk Basin, a city now also known as Tyesuku City.

---

## **Etymology**

The word **Tyesuku** can be traced back to the Proto-Laerad language, where _tyesu_ means "warm" and _ku_ means "stone." It is widely believed in academia that this term was initially a description of the local blacksmith profession—"warm stone" symbolizing the repeated process of forging iron. Over time, the word gradually became the designation for both the family and the place.

---

## **The Region of Tyesuku**

The **Tyesuku region**, also known as the Tyesuku Petty Kingdom, became a major kingdom within the Trusk Empire after the establishment of the Second Tyesuku Dynasty, governed by the King of Tyesuku. This area is primarily composed of the Tyesuku Mountains, the Genala Highlands, the Tyesuku Royal Domain, as well as Andong and the upper reaches of the Pernan River.

The Tyesuku Kingdom adopted a feudal system, mainly granting land to generals who earned military merit during the wars of unification and to the old members of the Tyesuku family. The family's initial feudal holding was a town in the southern part of the Trusk Basin, granted to them by the Second Heimet Dynasty, which also served as their base.

---

## **The House of Tyesuku**

This is a noble family that runs through Trusk's history.

There are scattered records of the Tyesuku family in historical inscriptions before Tyesuku Weber, but they were mostly minor local officials who came to the capital to report for duty. The Tyesuku family only rose to prominence during the time of Tyesuku Weber.

It rose to become an important political force in the empire during the Second Heimet Dynasty. The third emperor had no direct heirs, and the political power fell into the hands of his nephew, Decoheim, the eldest son of the Tyesuku family, which initiated the **First Tyesuku Dynasty**. During the Botiezhuahu Dynasty, although the direct descendants of Decoheim I intermarried with the Botiezhuahu royal family, the collateral branch of the Tyesuku family (the line of Weber II) did not die out. They were granted a fiefdom in Tyesuku City, where they remained dormant for many years. Led by Decoheim III, they finally launched an uprising, overthrew the Portesdrahu Dynasty, and ascended the throne again, establishing the **Second Tyesuku Dynasty** and becoming the true rulers of the Trusk Empire.